CamelTestSupport style of testing #3511 (#3847)
apache/camel-quarkus: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/user-guide/testing.adoc

----

More examples of WireMock usage can be found in the Camel Quarkus integration test source tree such as https://github.com/apache/camel-quarkus/tree/main/integration-tests/geocoder[Geocoder].

> == Testing with `CamelTestSupport` in JVM mode

Author: @ppalaga I added a chapter about jvm testing. Fro my PoV I'd like to add a list of features, which are supported (and covered by junit tests)

> == Testing with `CamelTestSupport` in JVM mode

Reviewer: The title is a bit misleading IMO, because CamelTestSupport does not work on Quarkus. 

How about "`CamelTestSupport` style of testing" or "Testing with `CamelQuarkusTestSupport` in JVM mode"? 

Also in the introductory sentence, I think it would be good to give some context by including link to the page where CamelTestSupport is documented. E.g. 

> If you used plain Camel before, you may know `https://camel.apache.org/components/latest/others/test-junit5.html[CamelTestSupport]` already. Unfortunately the Camel variant won't work on Quarkus and so we prepared a replacement called `CamelQuarkusTestSupport`.

Author: Makes sense, thanks!

----

More examples of WireMock usage can be found in the Camel Quarkus integration test source tree such as https://github.com/apache/camel-quarkus/tree/main/integration-tests/geocoder[Geocoder].

== `CamelTestSupport` style of testing

If you used plain Camel before, you may know https://camel.apache.org/components/latest/others/test-junit5.html[CamelTestSupport] already.
Unfortunately the Camel variant won't work on Quarkus and so we prepared a replacement called `CamelQuarkusTestSupport`, which can be used in JVM mode.

There are several limitations:

> * Test has to be annotated by `@QuarkusTest` and has to extend `CamelQuarkusTestSupport`.

Author: Fixed

> * Quarkus runs tests in a custom classloader which JUnit is not aware of (see the https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started-testing#applying-interceptors-to-tests[documentation]). If JUnit's callback (i.e. `org.junit.jupiter.api.extension.BeforeEachCallback`) is used, it may not work as expected. Use the quarkus callbacks instead (see the https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started-testing#enrichment-via-quarkustestcallback[documentation]) or use annotations like `@org.junit.jupiter.api.BeforeEach`.

Reviewer: Is this really relevant for end users? They are not supposed to use org.junit.jupiter.api.extension.BeforeEachCallback. That one is for JUnit 5 extension developers, no?

Author: I changed text to 

```
JUnit Jupiter callbacks (`BeforeEachCallback`, `AfterEachCallback`, `AfterAllCallback`, `BeforeAllCallback`, `BeforeTestExecutionCallback` and `AfterTestExecutionCallback`) might not work correctly. See the https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started-testing#enrichment-via-quarkustestcallback[documentation].
```

, which should warn the users to be cautious about callbacks.
@ppalaga Do you agree?

> * Camel Quarkus lifecycle does not allow to start/stop Camel context. Context is started before execution of the first test and closed after the finish of the last one. Test has to be written with consideration with this limitation. If it is not possible to write a test with such limitation, `@TestProfile` has to be used. Test profile forces quarkus to restart its engine, therefore it creates a new Camel context (see the https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started-testing#testing_different_profiles/[documentation] about this feature).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Camel Quarkus does not support stopping and re-starting the same `CamelContext` instance within the life cycle of a single application. You will be able to call `CamelContext.stop()`, but `CamelContext.start()` won't work.
* Starting and stopping `CamelContext` in Camel Quarkus is generally bound to starting and stopping the application and this holds also when testing. 
* Starting and stopping the application under test (and thus also `CamelContext`) is under full control of Quarkus JUnit Extension. It prefers keeping the application up and running unless it is told to do otherwise.
* Hence normally the application under test is started only once for all test classes of the given Maven/Gradle module.
* To force Quarkus JUnit Extension to restart the application (and thus also `CamelContext`) for a given test class, you need to assign a unique `@io.quarkus.test.junit.TestProfile` to that class. Check the https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started-testing#testing_different_profiles[Quarkus documentation] how you can do that. (Note that `https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started-testing#quarkus-test-resource[@io.quarkus.test.common.QuarkusTestResource]` has a similar effect.)
```

Author: fixed

The `CamelQuarkusTestSupport` implements `QuarkusTestProfile`, therefore the test class could be used as a value for `@TestProfile`.
*  Camel Quarkus executes the production of beans during the build phase. Because all the tests are
build together,  exclusion behavior is implemented into `CamelQuarkusTestSupport`. If a producer of the specific type and name is used in one tests, the instance will be the same for the rest of the tests.

[source,java]
----
@QuarkusTest
@TestProfile(SimpleTest.class) //necessary only if "newly created" context is required for the test (worse performance)
public class SimpleTest extends CamelQuarkusTestSupport {
    ...
}
----

> 

Reviewer: Did we say somewhere that they need to add camel-quarkus-junit5 preferably in test scope to be able to use CamelQuarkusTestSupport?

Author: I added this information into the doc before list of limitations.
